=== Setting ===The sinking of the White Ship leaves King Henry I of England without a clear heir, and The Anarchy begins upon his death. Henry's nephew Stephen of Blois and Henry's daughter Maud fight for the throne. Ambitious nobles and churchmen take sides, hoping to gain advantages. The novel explores themes of intrigue and conspiracy against historical events. It explores the development of medieval architecture, the civil war, secular/religious conflicts, and shifting political loyalties.The story is divided into six sections plus a prologue. The headings are:Prologue, 1123Part One, 1135?1136Part Two, 1136?1137Part Three, 1140?1142Part Four, 1142?1145Part Five, 1152-1155Part Six, 1170?1174=== Plot summary ===A red-headed man is hanged for theft after being condemned by a priest, a knight, and a monk. His pregnant lover curses the men who condemned him and flees.Construction of a house for William Hamleigh, the son of a lord and his future wife is halted, forcing Tom Builder and his family to seek work. When his wife dies in childbirth, Tom abandons his newborn because he has no food for him. He comes across Ellen, an outlaw they had met earlier in the woods. When Tom tries to find the child again, she says the baby was taken to a monastery cell and that he will be charged with abandonment if he says the baby is his. The baby is found by a priest called Francis who is coming to visit his brother Philip, the leader of the cell. The baby is named Jonathan and kept by Philip. Francis tells Philip of a plot against the new king, Stephen. Philip tells the archdeacon Waleran and travels to Kingsbridge Priory where he is made prior there in a deal with Waleran, who becomes bishop. Jonathan is sent to live with him. Tom's family settles in Kingsbridge with Ellen and her son Jack. Waleran tells the Hamleighs that the Earl of Shiring is plotting against the king. The Earl of Shiring's daughter, Aliena, is the one who rejected William. The Hamleighs arrest the earl. Prior Philip wants to expand his priory by rebuilding a cathedral. Jack burns down the old Romanesque cathedral without getting caught. Philip hires Tom to build a new one.Philip and Waleran go to King Stephen to ask for stone from Shiring, but Waleran wants the stone for his own castle. The Hamleighs are given ownership of the Shiring with Philip getting rights to the stone. Percy Hamleigh does not support the cathedral. William attacks Aliena and her brother Richard at their castle. He rapes the girl and injures the boy. Homeless and destitute, Aliena and Richard petition the king for aid. Their dying father Bartholomew is in prison and demands they swear an oath to work to regain the earldom. Aliena supports Richard financially by becoming a wealthy wool merchant, with Phillip's help. William and Waleran try and fail to have the cathedral moved to Shiring.Tom's son Alfred bullies Jack. Brother Remigius charges Ellen and Tom with fornication. Waleran, who was cursed by the woman at the hanging, orders Ellen to live apart from Tom. Outraged, Ellen returns to the forest with Jack. Tom befriends Prior Philip and, when Ellen returns, he persuades Philip to allow them to marry. Jack and Alfred fight over Aliena. While the better mason, Jack is expelled from the cathedral construction. He becomes a monk to stay in Kingsbridge.Richard becomes a knight and gains the favour of King Stephen by defending him at the Battle of Lincoln in the civil war against Maud. William and Richard compete for the earldom, which Stephen gives to William, but its market is being outcompeted by a new market at Kingsbridge. Attempting to restore his fortunes, William burns down Kingsbridge and kills many people, including Tom Builder. After losing her fortune again, Aliena agrees to marry Alfred if he supports Richard. Jack learns that his father, a French jongleur who washed ashore, was framed for theft. Jack and Aliena make love on the morning of her wedding. When she marries Alfred anyway, Ellen curses him, making him impotent.Jack goes to Spain and France to hone his skills as a mason and to meet his father Jacques Cherbourg's family in Cherbourg, staying committed to Aliena throughout.Alfred persuades Philip to replace the wooden roof with a stone vault, which collapses during a service, killing many people. Aliena gives birth to a red-headed son, and Alfred abandons her. Aliena follows evidence of Jack's sculpture through France, finding him in Paris.They make love, and she tells him of the collapsed roof. Jack helps to complete a cathedral, and a miracle attributed to him brings support for a journey to Kingsbridge with their baby, where they seek permission to marry. Philip orders them apart until her marriage to Alfred is annulled. This requires Waleran Bigod?s recommendation to the archbishop, but Waleran and the Hamleighs intend to ruin Philip and Aliena. Waleran allows William to attack Kingsbridge again, but it fails. Jack learns his father was hanged by Waleran.Many years of famine pass. Richard attacks William's land. Richard has joined the forces of Maud's son, Henry, Count of Anjou. When Henry invades, Stephen agrees to have Henry succeed him, with all properties to revert to their former owners prior to Stephen?s reign. However Stephen is not forcing the handovers, meaning that Richard might not gain the earldom until Stephen's death. Aliena persuades William's young wife, who loathes William, to hand the castle over to them before William returns, making Richard the righful earl. William returns to the village of Hamleigh, and Waleran proposes to sell him the position of sheriff of Shiring. They plan again to move the diocese from Kingsbridge to Shiring, and Alfred supports them. Richard kills Alfred for trying to rape Aliena. Richard is sent to fight in the Holy Land where he dies. Aliena and Jack can now marry.After many years, Kingsbridge cathedral is completed. Waleran accuses Philip of fornication by claiming the monk Jonathan is Philip's son. Ellen swears that Jonathan is Tom Builder?s son. After Waleran accuses her of perjury, she exposes his own perjury in the framing of Jacques Cherbourg. Brother Remigius confirms her testimony, and Waleran is convicted.Jacques was framed because he was the sole survivor of the sinking of the White Ship carrying William Adelin, heir of King Henry I.Meanwhile, William Hamleigh has become involved with the plot to assassinate Thomas Becket, the Archbishop of Canterbury, so that Peter of Warehem can be appointed bishop of Kingsbridge. William is convicted of sacrilege and hanged. The Pope forces King Henry?s public repentance and symbolic subjugation of the crown to the church.